hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery again
bringing you another tasty morsel from
Chinese history for the 55% of my
listeners who are not of this land of
the free home of the brave I'm guessing
you might be disappointed to see yet
another American themed topic after such
a long wait - and if you're wondering
why a topic like this is being covered
in the China history podcast there
actually is some history behind this and
that's what I wanted to cover here so
just in time for the holidays I figured
this would be a nice light flavorful
topic that we could write out the end of
the year with and besides no matter what
you think of Chinese food love it like
it or hate it it truly is one of the
middle Kingdom's greatest cultural
exports certainly to this country it's
right up there alongside martial arts
Chinese fashions and aesthetics there
are hundreds of thousands of Chinese
restaurants around the world and more
than 40,000 in the US alone the reason I
thought this might be a nice episode was
that I found two books that were just
brilliant in their total immersion of
the topic whereas I'm only focusing on
the history here these two books offer
up the whole las vegas-style buffet of
information about Chinese food in
America how it got here and most
interestingly how it was all tied up
with the experience of early Chinese
immigrants in the u.s. the first book
was and roukoz 2009 work entitled chop
suey
a cultural history of Chinese food in
the United States that's from Oxford
University Press I'm going to use a few
priceless quotes from an trucco's book
in this podcast the other one was
Jennifer ate Lee's New York Times
bestseller the fortune cookie chronicles
adventures in the world of Chinese food
that came out in 2008 and was published
by 12
an imprint of Grand Central publishing
these two books plus the usual
assortment of odds and ends I gleamed
using Baidu and the
Google provided most of the info
presented here today now everyone will
stop rolling their eyes for a minute
about my topic selection let me explain
why I'm doing this the whole matter of
how Chinese cuisine came to America and
how it was perceived welcomed and
rejected by everyone who came in contact
with it is it's actually quite
interesting and has a historic angle
last episode we looked at the time when
an American vessel first visited China
right after this new nation was
established and this was the story of
the merchant vessel Empress of China and
the events that followed all the way up
to caleb Cushing's visit to Canton and
the Treaty of Wong Jia signed between
China and the US and 1844 today we pick
up shortly thereafter when the people in
America first began to interact with
Chinese or Celestials as they were
called by many in those days the history
of Chinese food in America naturally
begins when Chinese first started
arriving on mass during the days right
after gold was discovered at Sutter's
Mill on January 24 1848 within two years
the population of San Francisco
increased 20 times once word reached
China about the gold rush and the rich
pickings in America it led to a flood of
emigration from southern Guangdong to
the u.s. west coast most of these
Chinese who came were from an area
within the geographic triangle of
Kaiping Taishan and xin hoye these
cities are all located on the western
edge of the Pearl River Delta and
southern Guangdong when the floodgates
opened amongst the thousands and
thousands of Chinese who began the
perilous and uncertain journey to the
Golden State were restaurant tours
who packed up all their pots and pans
and ingredients that they figured they
couldn't get in California and these
entrepreneurs knew with so many of their
kind heading to work the
old mines they'd have to eat and it was
doubtful if the dishes they were used to
could could be had in this new world
as soon as many of these Chinese began
pouring into northern California they at
once began foraging for anything
familiar they could find in the forests
and pastures mushrooms fungus herbs
anything that looked familiar they
gathered and since most all of these
people from this region were farmers as
soon as they settled down somewhere to
pan for gold or dig in the hills they
planted vegetable gardens nearby with
seeds they brought with them from China
so many of these Chinese no mean just
did what came naturally to them already
experts in China at getting as much as
they could out of small patches of land
they tilled their bountiful harvest and
this new land was used to supply
restaurants and the many grocery stores
that sprang up wherever there were
enough Chinese to create a market when
demand reached critical mass export
firms in Hong Kong stepped up to the
plate and began supplying all these
dried foodstuffs and other necessities
to prepare and cook Chinese food along
with these known mean these farmers were
you mean as well
fishermen who took their expertise from
China to the u.s. west coast and began
harvesting every imaginable kind of fish
or crustacean that called San Francisco
Bay home the Smithsonian Institution
records that the very first Chinese
restaurant to open was called Macau and
Woosung the proprietor was one Norman a
Singh who is credited with opening the
first all-you-can-eat Chinese buffet one
buck was all it cost and it was an
instant hit in its earliest days it was
low cost that that mainly defined
Chinese food Norman ah Singh was an
early pillar of San Francisco Chinese
society and besides being the first
Chinese restaurant tour he is remembered
as the man who stood up to California
Governor John Bigler he had written an
open letter to governor Bigler
sailing him for his anti Chinese
rhetoric of the day and I mentioned
governor Bigler and my CHP forty-four
episode covering the Chinese Exclusion
Act of 1882 he was the guy if you recall
who had promised as part of his 1852
re-election campaign to quote check this
tide of Asiatic immigration I've also
read that before Macau and Wu song
opened their doors they were preceded by
an establishment called the Canton
restaurant that opened 164 years ago on
December 10th 18-49 besides these two
the earliest places to offer Chinese
food was they were called wall high and
cone Singh's by 1882 there were fourteen
more Chinese restaurants along with 175
Chinese laundries 77 dry goods stores
and sixty-two Chinese groceries these
were the trades that most identified
with the earliest Chinese immigrants
these were nice safe businesses for
Chinese because there was no open
conflict with Caucasian workers these
Caucasian workers weren't gonna be
caught dead doing someone else's laundry
or working in a restaurant but when it
came to manual labor jobs including
working the mines and the railroads
these Caucasian Americans didn't take
long to start complaining about these
immigrants who were stealing their jobs
and depressing wages these earliest
Chinese restaurants will call Chow Chows
their earliest customers were the
laborers who toiled in the gold mines in
Chinatown the laborers living on a
budget would patronize these earliest
eateries usually located below street
level for a nickel or a dime they would
sit on three-legged stools or benches
and enjoy a simple meal almost like back
home all of these people from China were
men no women they had no one to cook for
them so in order to get their three
squares a day they ate at these
restaurants let me quote from
Joe's book about what New York Tribune
correspondent Bayard Taylor wrote about
the Chinese restaurants in San Francisco
Chinatown quote there were French
restaurants on the plaza and on DuPont
Street an extensive German establishment
on Pacific Street the Fonda piranha
the Italian confectionery and three
Chinese houses denoted by their long
three-cornered flags of yellow silk the
latter are much frequented by Americans
on account of their excellent cookery
and the fact that meals are $1 each
without regard to quantity Cong songs
house is near the water
Wong tongs and Sacramento Street and Tom
Ling's and Jackson Street there the
grave Celestials serve up their Chow
Chow and curry besides many genuine
English dishes their tea and coffee
cannot be surpassed these triangular
three-cornered yellow flags found
outside of any Chinese restaurant were
akin to the barber's poles that we in
the states are familiar with you know
the red white and blue twirling helix
things that still to this day signify a
barber shop the earliest Chinese
restaurants with their triangle yellow
silk Flags also had the same symbols of
their trade later on one of the
mainstays of Chinese restaurants into
the 20s would be these mechanical piano
players the roaring 20s by the way and
the prohibition that set in from 1920 to
1933 beginning with the Volstead Act
really clobbered the restaurant industry
if people couldn't get a scotch and soda
but their steak and potatoes they just
stayed home the Chop Suey joints had a
field day because they rarely served
liquor at Chinese restaurants their
business boomed a Chinese restaurant was
often a destination unto itself and
didn't require booze to lure in the
customers these earliest Chinese
restaurants were simple and primitive
the multi-storied palaces that became
the pillars of San Francisco Chinatown
were still a ways off these wouldn't
come till after the 1906 earthquake some
of these early
pioneers were already in the restaurant
business and had learned the ropes in
Canton or in Hong Kong and Macau many of
them were already familiar with how to
prepare Chinese dishes for the white man
the earliest Chinese proprietors figured
out early on the locals in the u.s.
didn't take too kindly to anything that
tasted too authentic it took them about
a second to learn these Americans like
sweet over savory and the crispy or the
better another thing about these
restaurants that were patronized by
Caucasians was that they offered Western
fare right alongside the Chinese dishes
Chinese food was initially not
particularly embraced by the American
locals and when the racism began to heat
up in the 1860s and 70s the revulsion of
Chinese immigrants included their
cuisine as well furthermore no one would
want to be seen frequenting any Chinese
restaurants during these bad old days
since it implied you weren't on board
with the rest of the country as far as
supporting the anti-chinese sentiment
that was prevalent you know wherever
there was a nearby Chinatown even during
the more heated years just before the
Chinese Exclusion laws were enacted
there were still certain businessmen in
the community who regardless of
sentiment engaged in commerce with the
Chinese and would from time to time get
together with them and participate in
these banquets usually held at the most
spectacular three-story Chinatown
restaurant palaces of the day some of
the writing from those who attended
these Affairs is quite amusing and ruko
had a funny quote about what someone
wrote of this 19th century American
Chinese food quote almost everything has
the same taste of nut oil sic lead all
over and few Western palates can endure
even the most delicate of their dishes
shark's fins stewed bamboo duck eggs
boiled baked and stewed in oil
pork disguised in hot sauces and other
things like these are the standard
dishes of a Chinese bill of fare though
they may have an infinite variety of
sweet meats which are real
palatable and of sweet cakes which are
inviting in their quaint odd forms and
decorations but our ashes and wormwood
and taste is the racism and Prejudice
heated up during and after the period
when the Chinese Exclusion Act was
passed the jokes myths and urban legends
about what the actual ingredients of
Chinese food were began to heat up each
claim about the dubious ingredients
became more preposterous and outlandish
than the next whatever the filthiest
vermin crawling in the back alleys of
Chinatown you can trust it was rumoured
by the city folk to be one of the main
ingredients of Chinese food
and this undeserved stereotype became
even more reason to despise and look
down on Chinese in American society in
the wake of 1882 Samuel Gompers one of
the best known of all labor leaders had
played his part in Fanning the flames of
racism in 1902 the AFL founder that's
American Federation of Labor not
American Football League to justify the
Chinese Exclusion Act had said quote
some of the reasons for Chinese
Exclusion meat versus rice American
manhood versus Asiatic ism which
shall survive so this was the kind of
talk wafting about the difference in the
way the Chinese prepared their cuisine
was just another thing that the ignorant
and prejudiced could point at to ensure
themselves of their own superiority but
Along Came Chop Suey which though not an
instant success began to take hold in
America as food that offered the
adventure as something exotic and
sophisticated one of the pioneer Chinese
eateries in San Francisco called it a
dish for quote local artists under the
influence of the Orientalist aesthetic
unfortunately there were no somach yen
types back then who were chronicling the
earliest days of Chop Suey how it was
invented who invented it and what the
actual ingredients were I read lots of
stories about how it all began but
there's hardly anything definitive that
we can sink our teeth into
the most popular theory behind the
creation of chop suey and how it made
its way to America points to the good
people of the area in and around Tai
Shan in Guangdong Province now one of
these days I need to do a whole podcast
series on this town because it's a very
special place the city can trace its
roots back to at least the home rule
emperor yes good ol Kuya and Jeong the
founder of the Ming Dynasty it's located
on the west side of the Pearl River
Delta
just south of Jungmann between the six
decades from 1850 to 1910 the people of
Tai Shan witnessed 14 massive floods
seven typhoons for earthquakes two
severe droughts four epidemics five
famines and a 12 year war that pitted
the tyshaun locals against the Jaquez a
conflict that ended in 1867 with over a
million death so it's easy to see when
the floodgates opened in America after
the start of the gold rush why so many
of these brave Chinese immigrants came
from Tai Shan more than half of all
Chinese immigrants in the u.s. at least
up to the 1950s came from Tai Shan and
it's also estimated that this number
might be as high as 80% back in the
early eighties when I used to teach
English in LA's Chinatown the original
one all of these kids I taught came from
Tai Shan so although this isn't by any
means a fact popular belief is that chop
suey as we know and love it was brought
to America by the good people of Tai
Shan and that it was a dish from that
little corner of Guangdong Province the
name Chop Suey comes from the local
dialect of the Mandarin word sauce we ha
means miscellaneous and Shui means bits
and pieces so it means in short odds and
ends it's believed that the way Chop
Suey came about was that whoever was
doing the cooking would take a bunch of
leftovers or unsold vegetables whatever
was handy and then chop everything up
and mix it all together into a kind of
stir-fry there's lots of theories about
this but
truth is who knows it's plausible and
explanation as any of the others I've
heard most likely in Jennifer 8 Lee
maintains chop suey is almost as
American as apple pie
it was invented here and in fact you'd
be hard-pressed to find the stuff in
China initially the dish was called Chow
Chop Suey it was right around the late
1890s that the word Chop Suey made it to
the American mainstream in the late 1800
someone who sampled the dish in New
York's Chinatown described it this way
quote Chow Chop Suey was the first dish
we attacked it is a toothsome stew
composed of bean sprouts chicken
gizzards and livers calves tripe dragon
fish dried and imported from China pork
chicken and various other ingredients I
was unable to make out and ruko found a
quote from Carl crow himself who we
featured in CHP episode 79 Paul French
pulling through for me with that great
biography of the man Carl crow proffered
his sagacious version of the Chop Suey
business quote soon after the discovery
of gold
the Chinese colony in the city was large
enough to support a couple of
restaurants conducted by Cantonese cooks
who catered to only their fellow exiles
from the Middle Kingdom the white man
had heard the usual sailor yarns about
what these pigtailed yellow men ate and
one night
a crowd of miners decided they would try
the strange fare just to see what it was
like they had been told that Chinese eat
rats and they wanted to see whether or
not this was true when they got to the
restaurant the regular customers had
finished their suppers and the
proprietor was ready to close his doors
but the miners demanded food so he did
the best he could to avoid trouble and
get them out of the way as soon as
possible he went out into the kitchen
dumped together all the food his Chinese
patrons had left in their bowls put a
dish a Chinese sauce on top and served
it to his unwelcome guests as they
didn't understand Cantonese slang they
didn't know what he meant when he told
them that they were
eating chop suey or begger hash at any
rate they liked it so well that they
came back for more and in that chance
way the great Chop Suey industry was
established Carl curl ladies and
gentlemen leave Hong Kong's visit to the
USA in August 1896 helped to create a
modicum of hoopla that helped launch the
Chop Suey craze just as when Tong Xiao
ping visited in January 1979 a sort of
china mania gripped certain parts of the
country Americans were hardly used to
seeing the likes of venerable characters
from China such as Li Hong Jong who
always dressed in the traditional
Chinese fashion and used exoticness with
his dress and deportment Lee Hong John
of course was one of the major
characters of the late Qing Dynasty
helping to put down the Taiping
rebellion and later serving as China's
best-known diplomat until his death in
1901 Americans just ate this stuff up
when they read about it in the prints by
the time he left New York City the
people who jumped on the Chop Suey
bandwagon mushroomed there were still no
small amount of detractors who shunned
this strange cuisine and the jokes and
racist comments of the dubious
ingredients contained in chaps so he
never went out of style whether all
began in San Francisco or New York I
couldn't find out the Chinese on both
coasts after seeing how the Americans
took to this stuff set out for new
untapped markets inland to set up their
restaurants and serve up this strange
Americanized version of their cuisine to
an ever-growing appreciative American
public there was no one single version
of chop suey everyone had their own way
of preparing it there's an interesting
story about a jet named LEM Sen a
Chinese who called San Francisco home he
made the claim that he was the inventor
of chop suey
mr. lems son took this claim quite
seriously and after seeing how quickly
the American public was taking to this
dish like any self-respecting American
might do he's
a relief in the courts to get these
imitators to cease and desist with their
copycat dishes I'm gonna read you a
clipping I picked up courtesy of the
Google from the New York Times of June
15th 1904 it's a little long but to be
honest with you I read it and found it
terribly interesting not only is a
little vignette into turn-of-the-century
attitudes towards Chinese in America but
also for the the snootiness and sense of
racism that bubbles up through
throughout the narrative then at the end
the commentator reverts to good old
Charlie Chan exaggerated pidgin Chinese
accents to mock alum Sen you know
something let me just read it and just
groove on the kind of stuff that made it
to the prints back in 1904 hundred and
ten years ago Chop Suey injunction LEM
son of Frisco here to allege copyright
infringement Chinatown last night was
plunged in a gloom worse than Sumerian
and notwithstanding the fact that the
Chop Suey restaurants were more crowded
than usual there was an air of silent
preoccupation overhanging the habituate
and PAL streets the reason was that
London's sin recently of San Francisco
had shaken the dust of the Golden Gate
from his garments and had come here
armed with many legal documents which
purported to show that he was the
original inventor and sole proprietor of
the dish known as Chop Suey LEM sin it
appears has placed all these documents
in the hands of Rufus P Livermore a
lawyer who has an office in the st. Paul
building and it is further food for
alarmist comment that the lawyer
it is said will proceed presently to
obtain an injunction in the Supreme
Court restraining all Chinese restaurant
keepers from making and serving chop
suey when Rufus P Livermore was seen
last night with regard to the matter he
said I always thought chop suey was a
Chinese dish until several weeks ago
then the inventor came and said it
wasn't ventured the reporter no I did
not get this case until two days ago but
when
Prince Pooh was doing Chinatown the
other day one of his escorts who was
anxious to please him said and now your
highness we will eat some of your
national dish chop suey
what is chop suey asked Prince Pooh
innocently that aroused my suspicions
and they were confirmed two days later
when the Frisco came to my
office and asked me to get an injunction
against all persons who manufactured and
served the national dish now the
principal referred to in this article is
Poulin nephew of the Guangxu Emperor who
visited the u.s. says the Emperor's
represented him for the World's Fair in
st. Louis in 1904 the piece continues
quote according to lem send Livermore's
client chop suey is no more a national
dish of the Chinese than pork and beans
the who says he invented it
says there is not a grain of anything
celestial in it LEM san according to his
own story says that he was born in San
Francisco he was never in China he
worked for many years in a Chinese
restaurant in San Francisco and was
later employed in a bohemian restaurant
run by an American it was just before
the arrival of Lee Hong Chung and a
visit to this country that a real
interest in things Mongolian and
celestial began says LEM Sen the owner
of the restaurant in San Francisco
suggested that LEM son manufacture
somewhere dish that would pass as
Chinese and gratify the public craze at
the time LEM says that it was then he
introduced to the astonished world the
great dish then he says some American
man stole his receipt his quote papal
this you know sort of goofs on the
Chinese pronunciation of the word paper
and here is where this New York Times
piece reverts to this you know mocking
and comical rant from lemon if this
didn't amuse the Anglos of the day I
don't know what did it's written out
phonetically like this now LEM Sen says
quote Mela can man make thousand dollar
now LEM Sen make two but Ali time look
for Melek and man who
domi come me find now me want a papal
back and all stop make chop suey
or pay me for allowi do Saeng
considering that l'm sin supposedly was
born in san francisco i found it strange
that his ranch sounded as if it came
from someone fresh off the boat
and besides writers in New York had been
mentioning chop suey long before Lee
Hong Jong and his entourage blew into
town and left anyways 1904 this was the
kind of stuff you might read about in
the New York Times white America was
still getting a kick out of poking fun
at the Chinese in society and using chop
suey as the vehicle to cut them down to
size one thing to note as far as
differentiating the San Francisco and
New York Chinatown immigrants
experiences was that New York was a
vastly larger melting pot of people from
all over the world than was San
Francisco in New York the Chinese were
simply just another group of immigrants
in San Francisco because their numbers
were so much greater and they were a
larger fish and a much smaller pond this
was one reason why they were so singled
out by racists and anti-immigration
groups they stuck out in New York that
Chinese immigrants didn't face anything
as intense as their West Coast cousins
the big bang as far as the proliferation
of Chop Suey joints in America occurred
right after the turn of the century very
soon after the lumps Sun affair that's
really when the more adventurous and
gutsy Chinese left the comfort and
convenience of the mother ships in New
York or San Francisco and headed inland
hopefully to greener pastures by the
1920s Chop Suey was wholly mainstream in
American society and they were plenty of
Asian immigrants who had set up
restaurants throughout the major
population centers of the country in
1923 the Los Angeles phonebooks counted
28 Chinese restaurants by 1941 this
number grew to 73 the San Francisco
earthquake of 1906 had a huge impact on
the Chinese immigrant experience we
discussed this in the Chinese Exclusion
episode it
an immediate and game-changing impact on
the restaurants of San Francisco
Chinatown the earthquake pretty much
devastated the old Chinatown
rising from the ashes were these Chinese
style three-story banquet houses and
dining there was I was a must for any
tourist passing through San Fran in 1922
a company was launched in Detroit by two
guys dr. el hanout and Wally Smith that
brought the convenience of preparing
chop suey
right into the American household now I
grew up with this stuff and I could
still remember the jingles from all
their commercials that ran ad nauseam
throughout the 1960s and 70s this was
none other than Lajoie Products Inc
owned today by good old ConAgra Foods
their bitter rival Chung King came along
right after the end of World War two
chongqing was based way to heck up in
North Minnesota of all places in the
town of Grand Rapids they too ended up
under the umbrella of ConAgra who in the
mid-90s phased out this once-great brand
of my youth Lachaise ads promised
american moms quote now you can make
genuine chop suey or chow mein in ten
minutes the classic recipe said fry up
some meat and a can of Latroy vegetables
and voila there it is and to top it all
off shake on the choice Chinese sauce
which was what their marketing experts
figured was better than calling soy
sauce the standard Chop Suey in America
not that I've had it in 20 years was
almost always composed of bean sprouts
water chestnuts onions celery bamboo
shoots baby corn some sort of meat and
all mixed together with some sort of
medium viscosity sauce exotic but
familiar all at the same time if you
wanted to get fancy that was always one
of the Montgomery family stalwarts sub
gum Chop Suey yes I always favored that
one because of the catchy name sub gum
something about that name is youngins
growing up in the Chicago suburbs dining
at Nanking limbs and the other Chop Suey
joints of the day
the word sub gum always intrigued me Wow
what could that mean well many years
later I learned this is just Cantonese
for sure gene which means something like
numerous and varied suck gum but don't
quote me on those tones this is the form
of Chop Suey where you mix seafood and
beef or pork or whatever hey what did we
know whatever the case may be the Golden
Age of Chop Suey in America if you will
was about from the turn of the century
until about 1960 many of us in America
grew up actually thinking this was the
national dish of China back in the day I
would spoon out all that Chop Suey chow
mein egg foo yung pressed duck and Moo
goo gai pan from those White's takeout
containers onto my dish and douse
everything with a healthy dose of soy
sauce I imagined this was more or less
how they did it in China too those
takeout containers by the way they had a
history to those iconic containers still
with us today were patented on November
13th 1894 by one Frederic weeks Wilcox
back then before we knew them as Chinese
takeaway containers they were called
paper pails
the beauty and simplicity of the product
speaks for itself as far as its
longevity of use it was a single sheet
of paper board scored and folded into a
leak-proof container it was the perfect
vessel to hold anything that was wet
they were also called oyster pails for
the reason that they were initially used
in the oyster fishing industry this is
back in the early 20th century it was
after World War two that the Chinese
restaurant owners learned that these
oyster pails made the ultimate takeout
boxes none of that sauce whatever leaked
out except you know through the top of
course but that handy wire handle
ensured that none of that sauce would
get on your hands it was mankind at his
engineering finest there's a lot of
jokes and urban legends about Jewish
people and their affinity for Chinese
food you know how like Chinese takeaway
places do such a brisk business with
Jews and Christmas because
everything else is closed something like
that there's a lot of jokes and urban
legends about Jewish people and their
affinity for Chinese food
you know how Chinese takeaway places do
such a brisk business with Jews on
Christmas because everything else is
closed something like that I've read
that this love affair began back in the
1930s when the Ashkenazi Jews began
passing through Ellis Island and made it
to the Lower East Side Brooklyn and you
know wherever they found something
recognizable in chop suey
Jewish cuisine like Chinese used a lot
of chicken broth lots of garlic and
onions and both cuisines saw vegetables
that were cooked down to a nice soft
texture both cuisines had sweet and sour
dishes and best of all Chinese food
never used dairy products this allowed
the Orthodox Jews to dig into without
fear of doing the unthinkable mixing
meats and dairy this wasn't the only
culture Chinese restaurant but it was
certainly the most famous in 1959 a gent
named Saul Bernstein opened a restaurant
at 135 Essex between Delancey and
Houston it was initially called
Bernstein on Essex but to those who
frequented the place it was known as
Shmuel Bernstein's quotes where kashrut
is king and quality reigns all under one
roof you could get kishka latkes corned
beef and Cantonese favorites like Moo
goo gai pan and lo mein Bernstein with
chicken livers the waiters all wore
Chinese skull caps with tassels rather
than Yama keys and their Chinese name
was who Paul Shang Shung cool pas means
Tambor anyways they close down in the
mid 90s there's also a kosher Chinese
place in Northeast Atlanta called hai
Peking in the back of a Kroger's where I
took some acids once I don't think the
Jews like Chinese food better than
anyone else but however you look at it
the two go way back so Americans living
from the turn of the century to the end
of World War two whether we knew it or
not we're living during the Chop Suey
Age the 1945 boom a yang chow
his book how to cook and eat in Chinese
came out and by then Chinese food it
already melted into the pot of American
cuisine pearl s buck wrote the foreword
to that famous cookbook that first gave
us the word stir-fry as the world became
smaller particularly after 1945 culinary
sophistication began to creep in but for
the most part by the time Beatlemania
hit in the US Chop Suey had become a
tired and worn-out tradition just when
the genre needed a boost along came the
Hunan Sichuan craze of the late 60s and
70s Lyndon Baines Johnson signed the
Immigration Act 1965 a Hart cellar Act
the house vote at 326 to 69 in favor of
this law you don't see too many votes
like this anymore for major legislation
anyways this new law decisively spelled
the final end for the Chinese Exclusion
laws even though the Act had been
repealed since 1943 now in 1965 any
Chinese who met the criteria which was
almost everyone could immigrate to
America for the first time since 1882
the Chinese immigrants passing through
the golden doors weren't limited to a
small geographic region adjacent to the
Pearl River Delta
now you had people from all over Taiwan
applying as soon as many of these people
got settled in the US they set up these
restaurants that served what I recall is
Mandarin food basically it wasn't like
the Cantonese that we all grew up with
that is to say these newfangled dishes
brought to us in part by the 1965
Immigration Act were like nothing
America was normally used to as a result
of the Chinese civil war that ended in
1949 a lot of Chinese from the mainland
sought refuge in Taiwan and these guys
were were from all over China Hunan
Sichuan who Beijing she Shanghai Leonean
Shandong everywhere a whole new
generation of entrepreneurs and
restaurateur
came to the rescue right at the time
when people were just getting ready to
give up on chop suey
and then just when this new generation
needed a boost to their product along
comes February of 1972 and in front of
the whole world Richard Milhous Nixon
Chow's down and some decidedly not chop
suey dishes and he shared the meal with
none other than premier Joe and Lai
himself a revolution was started and
these guys mostly from Taiwan in the
usual suspects Hong Kong Macau and
Southeast Asia they too figured out in
no time at all keep it sweet keep it
crispy deep-fried deep-fry sweet and
spicy sauces they knew what to do
don't make it too authentic the Chop
Suey aged gave way to the Hunan Sichuan
phenomenon of the 1970s the first panda
in restaurant opened in 1973 and this
led to the founding of Panda Express
ten years later today the strip malls
and shopping malls across America all
contain either a Panda Express a Manchu
wok Chinese gourmet Express pay way or
PF Chang the days that I grew up in were
old fashioned chop suey still reigns
supreme
we're gone it's a lot better now than it
ever was and now in the big cities many
years after Chinese integration to the
u.s. really took off dishes that were
rarely ever seen on these shores are now
available I mean I could drive thirty
minutes to Rowland Heights and get the
shaumyan Shinji on food local favorites
of Shaanxi Chengdu Chongqing Taiwan
Beijing you name it it's all here and in
almost all cases the businesses was
started by some China immigrant and
that's what makes up the common thread
that ties this whole history of Chinese
cuisine in America the whole phenomenon
of Chinese restaurants no matter where
from the United States or Amsterdam
Paris or New Delhi almost always go hand
in hand with the Chinese immigrant
experience this was certainly most true
here in
us a lot of stories we'll probably never
get told about the brave ones who left
the safety and comfort of New York and
San Francisco to venture into the
heartland of America to try their luck
in towns like Tucson El Paso st. Louis
how many Chinese communities big and
small have been spawned throughout this
great land that can trace their earliest
days in America to a Chinese restaurant
these days were getting more PhDs
entrepreneurs scientists and engineers
from China than people who are opening
up Chinese takeaways but I thought it
might be a nice topic to look at from a
historical point of view again I want to
recommend Jennifer 8 Lee's bestseller
the fortune cookie chronicles adventures
in the world of Chinese food and also
and roukoz chop suey another thing
Kaiser Gua retweeted an article about
ten days ago about a new restaurant that
just opened in Shanghai called fortune
cookie two guys Fung LOM and David Rossi
opened a place serving up the real
American thing in China so if you're
ever craving american-style Chinese
takeout the ultimate comfort food you
could try them out at 83 Chung shoe road
in the King on district of Shanghai
fortune cookies by the way we're not a
Chinese invention originally the fortune
cookie that is the the shape the taste
the the idea of inserting a piece of
paper inside with some message this is
actually a Japanese thing they used to
make these tea cakes as they were called
by hand 1,000 cookies per hour until
some Korean engineer 40 Tamura in Japan
figured out a machine it spits these
things out 6,000 per hour they were
called Fuji Oda sunbae it said when the
US government locked the Japanese up
inside the internment camps in
California during World War two these
bakeries that made these fortune cookies
change to Chinese hands and then once
the price had come down sufficiently by
1967 they became the free giveaway items
you know came with the check General
Tso's chicken that's another one of
those things I've mentioned this two
times already another podcasts tour Tom
Kang was a protege of Tom guava and he
played a key role in preserving the
Ching dynasty by helping to defeat the
Taiping rebels in China he is remembered
as one of the great military man of
recent Chinese history in America we
know him for his chicken dish that he
probably never ate but might be pleased
to know immortalized his name in this
land
general saws chicken had everything and
everything an American might ever want
in a single dish chunks of deep-fried
boneless chicken nice and crispy a tangy
sauce sauteed garlic a little ginger and
chili peppers and the fact that told
Songtan was from hold on it really gave
this dish the necessary gravitas to
assure you that it was wholly authentic
to that province like everything
associated with the great innovation in
Chinese American cuisine there's a story
behind general sauce chicken chef Poong
of the Hungarian restaurant in the
Changsha Great Wall Hotel invented the
dish in the mid 50s in Taipei he later
opened a place in New York that was a
favorite of Henry Kissinger the local
New York News did a story on chef Poong
and the story behind his general solace
chicken that put that that whole craze
into afterburner the craze for General
Tso's chicken and this new wave of
Chinese food has lasted into the 21st
century Chinese food in America has been
mainstream for decades now and has long
melted into the American pot of popular
culture that's all I got for you this
time my friends once again we set a new
record here at the China history podcast
it's been a good 45 days since the last
episode on November 22nd I thought I'd
have all the time in the world during
the holidays but it's been anything but
that I promise next time the topic will
have nothing to do with the United
States and we'll be back to the real
deal with Chinese history
I'm going to Frankfurt a mine January 24
25 26 and I'll be in London from the
27th to the 31st I notice Birmingham
city is playing Leicester City tempting
I'm gonna look into that my copy of
Endymion Wilkinsons China history a new
manual arrived when I got back from Hong
Kong this is the third printing of this
ultimate source for all things Chinese
history you might need a magnifying
glass to read the fine print but it's
over 1100 pages of material on the
history of everything you might want to
know about China this is gonna be an
invaluable addition to the CHP library
as far as selecting new potential topics
for the months and years ahead it's a
fine addition to any China scholars
library from the whole research team
editor's and technical staff here at the
China history podcast I'd like to wish
everyone a Happy New Year in May 2014
bring all of you the best of everything
this is Lazlo Montgomery signing off
from Claremont California 78 degrees
today and is sunny and beautiful as a
day can be I hope you'll consider
joining in next time for another
exciting episode of the China history
podcast nothing American next time I
promise you